Ladies and gentlemen, friends of Tennessee, we started out this series of television programs
early in January with the majority leader Senator Mike Mansfield of Montana as I guess.
Talk about the program that he expected or the Congress expected to enact during this
first session of the 87th Congress.
Now we wind up our program on this occasion because in a few days the Congress will
have recessed while the rest of this session with another distinguished leader of the Congress,
the whip of the United States Senate.
He is my friend and the very able legislator who has had a great part in the enactment
of the legislation that we have accomplished during this term, Senator Hewbrett Humphrey
of Minnesota.
Hewbrett has certainly has a pleasure to have you on the program with us.
Well, Estus, it's a joy to be on a program with you and it's a greater joy and it's a
rare privilege to serve with you in the United States Senate.
And before you get a chance to say one more word about me or about this program, I want
your friends to know and your constituents of the splendid work, the outstanding work that
you have accomplished and undertaken here in the Congress of the United States.
I wish to say to your people that I've never known a man with greater integrity and greater
courage in the legislative chamber and I want to compliment you.
Well, here we go.
That's very generous.
I didn't expect that.
If I had known you, you know, let me say all these things that I had you down here every
time I had a program.
But I thank you very much and I think that everyone who is watching and hearing this program
will know that Senator Humphrey has been the most active man on the United, on the floor
of the Senate during this session as he always is and that the many, many legislative accomplishments
of this session are in a great measure due to him.
I don't think anybody sponsored more legislation or fought it through more successfully.
Now, Hubert, first I'm not explaining what the whip of the Senate is.
We have a majority leader who has Senator Mansfield and the next in command is the whip of
the Senate.
He has a big whip.
He fights for the program.
He gets the members present.
He tries to push the bail through committees to get them in shape so that they can be acted
upon intelligently and fully debate.
How do you like being the whip of the Senate?
Hubert, do you want to tell us more about responsibilities?
Well, I like it.
I like it very much, Estes.
It takes a lot of time.
It does.
It takes a great deal of time, but has brought me into closer contact with my colleagues in
the Senate.
And I think I've gone to have a greater appreciation of their problems.
Besides that, it's a real pleasure to work with Senator Mansfield, a majority leader who
in his quiet and yet understanding and sincere manner is performing a great, or fulfilling a
great job as the majority leader.
And his record as a leader I think is excellent.
It's been kind of a pleasure to work with you.
He's a wonderful man.
Well, first let's talk about some of the domestic accomplishments.
Hubert, I think since the World War II has been the busiest session of Congress that I've
ever been in.
Yes.
We've certainly been very, very busy day and night in committees.
Let's talk about the domestic scene.
What were some of the accomplishments on the domestic program?
Well, Senator Kefaw, for the very first thing one ought to say about the Senate is that
we have to undertake the confirmation of all of the presidential nominations for these
many jobs in the government, these high, these positions of high responsibility.
In the beginning, this took a great deal of our time because each person appointed goes
through the process of hearings and testimony and then recommendation by the Committee and
action by the Senate.
That within itself is a major accomplishment.
And then we have to ratify all the treaties.
Ratify the treaties, yes.
I would say that our record was really very good.
We have unfinished business, but we have two sessions of the Congress.
Let's just take a look, for example, one of the first acts of this administration when
it found a recession on its hands.
It's in the...
Harry inherited that recession.
Was to act quickly in the field of temporary unemployment compensation.
The expansion of aid to dependent children of the unemployed.
Now, this went right directly to people.
The president ordered the wider distribution of our surplus food.
It was his first action.
First action, yes, sir.
And then the food stamp plan in certain areas of the United States was put into effect.
And then there are estus.
You may recall the minimum wage law which increased minimum wages to a dollar and a quarter
and extended the coverage to three million six hundred thousand more persons.
This was the greatest improvement in the minimum wage law since its original passage under
Franklin Roosevelt.
And we had the area redevelopment program.
That's a very important program here in the Hubert and it offers an awful lot of hope
to people in many areas of Tennessee because we have depressed areas both in the rural
and in other sections of Tennessee, particularly as a result of the depression and the coal
man in the area.
Yes.
Tell us briefly what the area redevelopment bill does.
Well, the area redevelopment bill provides loans for industries and local communities to
provide new industries and new job opportunities to improve local communities for new industries.
It also provides grants of money to local governments or when a local government is attempting
to build a new factory site or to expand its community facilities.
What the area redevelopment means is a kind of a domestic aid program for our own
and needy areas in our own underdeveloped areas.
Now we have an area like this in Northeastern Minnesota in the iron range country.
You visited that Estus and you have many friends there.
Just as you have these problems in the coal mining section.
It provides for the retraining of workers.
Yes, right.
And the relocation of workers.
And it is, I say, for facilities, for plant equipment for the improvement of jobs.
What's the point of some other things?
How about social security and how is airport development?
Yes, we expanded our social security program.
We increased the payments on an average of about 10%.
We took care of the highway program by...
And social security men can now draw social security when they reach 62.
Page 62.
And there were a number of improvements in that social security program.
We're going to, we brought up to date the highway program.
You may remember, under the previous administration, they sort of stretched it out.
Well, we brought it back on to schedule.
We advanced more money to the states for their highway construction program to get people
to work and to take care of the highway needs.
The Airport Act was passed, which will help all of the states in localities with airport
development.
And we have, we have an awful lot of towns and cities that want the airport development
too.
And then you recall, we passed the, what we call the Water Pollution Control Act.
Congressman Blotnik, go any of your good friends.
My state was the author in the house and I had the privilege of sponsoring it here in
the Senate.
This provides a aid to 5,000 communities for their sewage disposal facilities.
To prevent the pollution of lakes and streams and to really protect the public health.
Then besides that Senator Keefeoffer, there was a tremendous program in the field of health.
Your good friend, Lister Hill.
Senator Hill is chairman of that committee on health legislation brought to the Senate.
The greatest program for the National Institutes of Health in our fight against cancer and
against the diseases of the nervous system and against heart disease.
The greatest program we've ever had.
We also have the Community Health Facilities Act.
It will provide nursing home care and facilities for our elderly, new hospital construction.
This is without a doubt the largest and the most singularly important act relating to
hospital facilities that we've ever passed.
The housing bill.
The housing bill too, which I'm not whole lot in the way of housing, building housing
and giving people employment as well.
Then here with another thing, I thought I was very much interested in the wilderness
bill to try to preserve some of the natural beautiful places that we have in tech in that
past during this session.
Yes, that was that.
There's been one big year fight, you know.
It's going a long, long fight and you've taken a leading part in it.
I suppose one of the disappointments was that we didn't get full federal aid for education
in this session.
What did we get in the way of education, you know?
Well we received a two year extension of the National Defense Education Act, which has
been a very successful act, you know.
And then we received a two year extension of what we call public law 815 and 874.
These are laws that relate to helping the school districts and the localities where there's
a great deal of federal activity.
Now you have some of that now.
10 and see Oak Ridge and Clarksville and Snellahoma many places in Tennessee.
And you know that under those two laws, 815 and 874 are a center to keep offer almost
$2 billion of federal aid has been distributed since 1950.
And then we will be back next term, next session also trying to get some other five.
The president has told us that he's going to press again for a general school program
in higher education and an elementary and secondary education in the next session.
We're not giving up any more than, by the way, on our medical care, on our own.
On our hospital care program for the elderly, that's going to be one of the prime items.
And the second session, the 87th Congress, starting next January, we're going to put hospital
protection for our citizens, age 65, who are under social security.
We're going to put it within the social security program so that people will not have to undertake
a means test and go around asking and begging for something, but it'll be theirs by right.
Yes, and it's not going to be in such fashion that anybody needs fear of socializing medicine.
It's all that relates only to prepayment of hospital care.
Now we have a few minutes left to talk about our international affairs.
And you have taken a very leading part, and not only as whip of the Senate, but also as a senior member
of the Foreign Relations Committee.
Just a list and explain what we've done.
The first thing we had, of course, was in connection with Berlin and stepping up our defense
effort.
Yes, Senator, you've been very active in that yourself as a member of the Armed Services Committee.
You know that we had to add some six billion dollars of new appropriations to bring up
to date our defense structure.
We found ourselves within adequate forces for the kind of a world in which we live.
And this has been done.
We've had a space program, a fantastic space program, of over a billion and a half dollars.
And this had all been lagging, been permitted to sort of be at a half pace where we've stepped
it up.
We're not going to let the Russians occupy outer space.
This doesn't belong to them.
We're catching up and catching up rapidly.
The foreign aid program is not only a new program, but it's a new administration being completely
reorganized from Washington, D.C., right out to the country level itself.
And the president has insisted upon a new and an effective organization.
We don't want this waste in the program.
We want every dollar that we put into foreign aid to produce some results.
And as you know, most of it today is on the basis of loans, repayable in dollars.
And I think this makes a much more sensible program.
Then we have the piece.
And the emphasis has been put on technical assistance to the economic aid and the military.
That is correct.
That is what we call the human resources and the material resources of the country.
I mentioned the Peace Corps.
I want to say a word about the Peace Corps.
Another time I talk with people interested in international affairs, they explain the
necessity of some method of people to people, getting to know one another and to help technicians
helping people in other nations, particularly the newly developed nations.
Well, this is something that really catches their captures the imagination.
The senator who took the lead and putting forth and getting enacted the Peace Corps is
Senator Humphrey.
And I think it is one of the most important pieces of legislation that has passed this
Congress.
Now you tell us something.
Well, that is a wonderful introduction.
I will just say very quickly what we are doing is calling upon the young people of our
country, trained, experienced, healthy, filled with vitality and idealism and determination
and qualified to help other people help themselves, to help them in education and health, in construction
and road building, in improvement of the land and agriculture.
And I will tell you when you export American youth for the purposes of peace and for the
purposes of building, you help make a better world and you improve the prospects for
world peace.
And the response has been very encouraging.
And wonderful, Estes.
Well, ladies and gentlemen, I know that you have enjoyed visiting with Senator Humphrey,
the equip of the Senate as I have.
We certainly appreciate you being with us, Hubert.
This is the last program during this year and I want to thank this station for carrying
it as a public service until the beginning of the next session of the Congress.
Goodbye.